doc: add the blog post for the first major release of Notary Project (#300)
notaryproject/notaryproject.dev: content/en/blog/2023/announcing-major-release.md

---

> title: Notary Project announces a major release!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Notary Project announces first major release!
```

author:  "Notary Project Release Team"

> date: 2023-08-15

Author: Changed to the target date

draft: false
---

The Notary Project maintainers are proud to announce a major release, including [Notary Project specifications v1.0.0](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/releases/tag/v1.0.0), [notation v1.0.0](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation/releases/tag/v1.0.0), [notation-go v1.0.0](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-go/releases/tag/v1.0.0), and [notation-core-go v1.0.0](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-core-go/releases/tag/v1.0.0) which are ready for production use!

> ## What is Notary Project and Notation?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is The Notary Project and Notation?
```

> As containers and cloud native artifacts become common deployment units, users want to make sure that cloud native artifacts in their environments are authentic and not tampered with. The Notary Project is a set of specifications and tools intended to provide cross-industry standards for securing software supply chains through signing and verification, signature portability, and key/certificate management. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As containers and cloud native artifacts become common deployment units, users want to make sure that they are authentic and not tampered with in their environments. The Notary Project is a set of specifications and tools intended to provide cross-industry standards for securing software supply chains through signing and verification, signature portability, and key/certificate management. 
```

> As containers and cloud native artifacts become common deployment units, users want to make sure that cloud native artifacts in their environments are authentic and not tampered with. The Notary Project is a set of specifications and tools intended to provide cross-industry standards for securing software supply chains through signing and verification, signature portability, and key/certificate management. 

Reviewer 2: > intended to provide cross-industry standards

Does the Notary project actually "provide" the standards? I would think it would be more accurate to say:

"intended to implement cross-industry standards"

> Notation is a sub-project of Notary Project. It has the `notation` CLI and two Golang libraries that implement the latest [Notary Project specifications](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/releases/tag/v1.0.0). Notation was started in [Dec 2019](https://github.com/notaryproject/meeting-notes/blob/main/meeting-notes-2019.md#notary-v2-kickoff-meeting) and the code  has matured through a series of minor and RC releases over the last few years, the first release [v0.7.0-alpha.1](https://notaryproject.dev/blog/2021/announcing-notation-alpha1/) was available in Oct 2021 and reached [v1.0.0-RC.7](https://notaryproject.dev/blog/2023/announcing-notation-rc6/) in May 2023.

Reviewer 2: > few years, the first 

few years; the first 

(Use a semicolon here, not a comma.)

> Notation is a sub-project of the Notary Project GitHub organization. It has the `notation` CLI and two Golang libraries that implement the latest [Notary Project specifications](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/releases/tag/v1.0.0). Notation was started in [Dec 2019](https://github.com/notaryproject/meeting-notes/blob/main/meeting-notes-2019.md#notary-v2-kickoff-meeting) and the code  has matured through a series of minor and RC releases over the last few years, the first release [v0.7.0-alpha.1](https://notaryproject.dev/blog/2021/announcing-notation-alpha1/) was available in Oct 2021 and reached [v1.0.0-RC.7](https://notaryproject.dev/blog/2023/announcing-notation-rc6/) in May 2023.

Author: Yes, updated it with your suggestion

> Notation is a sub-project of Notary Project. It has the `notation` CLI and two Golang libraries that implement the latest [Notary Project specifications](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/releases/tag/v1.0.0). Notation was started in [Dec 2019](https://github.com/notaryproject/meeting-notes/blob/main/meeting-notes-2019.md#notary-v2-kickoff-meeting) and the code has matured through a series of minor and RC releases over the last few years; The first version of the CLI and libraries [v0.7.0-alpha.1](https://notaryproject.dev/blog/2021/announcing-notation-alpha1/) was released in Oct 2021. Several alpha, beta, and RC releases later, the binaries reached the final [v1.0.0-RC.7](https://notaryproject.dev/blog/2023/announcing-notation-rc6/) release in May 2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notation is a sub-project of Notary Project, which consists of the `notation` CLI and two Golang libraries which implement the latest [Notary Project specifications](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/releases/tag/v1.0.0). Notation was started in [Dec 2019](https://github.com/notaryproject/meeting-notes/blob/main/meeting-notes-2019.md#notary-v2-kickoff-meeting) and the code has matured through a series of minor and RC releases over the last few years; The first version of the CLI and libraries [v0.7.0-alpha.1](https://notaryproject.dev/blog/2021/announcing-notation-alpha1/) was released in Oct 2021. Several alpha, beta, and RC releases later, the binaries reached the final [v1.0.0-RC.7](https://notaryproject.dev/blog/2023/announcing-notation-rc6/) release in May 2023.
```

- [Notary Project OCI signature specification](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-specification.md)
- [Notary Project OCI COSE signature envelope](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-cose.md)
- [Notary Project OCI JWS signature envelope](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-jws.md)
- [Notary Project OCI signing and verification workflow](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signing-and-verification-workflow.md)
- [Notary Project signing scheme](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signing-scheme.md)
- [Notary Project Trust Store and Trust Policy](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/trust-store-trust-policy.md)
- [Notation Plugin specification](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md)

### Signing and verification functionalities

> From the software producer's perspective, signing a software artifact is the way to prevent tampering and ensure authenticity of the artifact. Signing software can also increase trust when distributing software artifacts to consumers. Notary Project provides the following core capabilities for the signing experience:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the software producer's perspective, signing a software artifact enables their consumers to detect tampering and ensure authenticity of the artifact. Signing software can also increase trust when distributing software artifacts to consumers. Notary Project provides the following core capabilities for the signing experience:
```

> - Sign artifacts using signing keys stored securely in a key management system (KMS). See the available plugins in the section [Extensibility: plugin support for Notation](#extensibility-plugin-support-for-notation)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Sign artifacts using signing keys stored securely in a key management system (KMS) or a signing service. See the available plugins in the section [Extensibility: plugin support for Notation](#extensibility-plugin-support-for-notation)
```

- Sign artifacts as well as list and inspect signatures stored in OCI-compliant registries
    - Compliant with [`image-spec v1.0.2`](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/tree/v1.0.2)
    - Compliant with [`distribution-spec v1.0.1`](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/tree/v1.0.1)
    - Compatible with [`image-spec v1.1.0-rc4`](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/tree/v1.1.0-rc4)
    - Compatible with [`distribution-spec v1.1.0-rc3`](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/tree/v1.1.0-rc3) (limited to [referrers tag schema](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc3/spec.md#referrers-tag-schema))
- Support two signature envelope formats 

>     - [COSE](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-cose.md): it provides message security assurance for services like IoT applications and using [CBOR](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8152) as the message-encoding format

Reviewer 4: I'd drop the format descriptions and keep the links.

> - Supports the [COSE](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-cose.md) and [JWS](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-jws.md) signature envelope formats.

>     - [COSE](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-cose.md): it provides message security assurance for services like IoT applications and using [CBOR](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8152) as the message-encoding format

Author: I would keep this description and incorporate feedback from @toddysm since it helps users understand more about the signature envelopes and their benefits.

>     - [JWS](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-jws.md): JWS is a JSON based envelope format for digital signatures that can be used when required for interoperability (mostly OIDC)

Reviewer 4: per above comment, i think you should remove this entrely

>     - [JWS](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-jws.md): JWS is a JSON based envelope format for digital signatures that can be used when required for interoperability (mostly OIDC)

Author: Same reason as explained above

> From the software consumer's perspective, verifying the signature of a signed artifact to ensure its integrity and authenticity. Notary Project provides the following core capabilities for verification experience:

Reviewer 2: > signed artifact to ensure its

signed artifact ensures its

> From the software consumer's perspective, verifying the signature of a signed artifact ensure the integrity and authenticity. Notary Project provides the following core capabilities for verification experience:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
From the software consumer's perspective, verifying the signature of a signed artifact to ensure its integrity and authenticity. Notary Project provides the following core capabilities for verification experience:
```

> - Verify signatures using [trust store and trust policy](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/trust-store-trust-policy.md) with fine-tuned OCI repository specific trust policies, and support for various enforcement levels for signature verification (e.g. `enforce`, `permissive`, `audit`) to enable a wide range of scenarios. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Verify signatures using [trust store and trust policy](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/trust-store-trust-policy.md). This also includes fine-tuned OCI repository specific trust policies and support for various enforcement levels for signature verification (e.g. `enforce`, `permissive`, `audit`) to enable a wide range of scenarios. 
```

> - [notation policy](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/cli-reference/notation_policy/) command is also introduced in this release to simplify the experience of importing and inspecting the trust policy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [notation policy](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/cli-reference/notation_policy/) command can be used simplify the experience of importing and inspecting the trust policy.
```

### Experimental features

> Experimental features are intended for testing and evaluation purposes only and should not be used in production environments. Users can enable experimental features in Notation CLI by setting the environment variable `NOTATION_EXPERIMENTAL` to 1 as showing below.

Reviewer 2: > as showing below.

as shown below

```
export NOTATION_EXPERIMENTAL=1
```

> There are two major features which are marked as experimental but might be useful in some specific scenarios.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are two major features which are marked as experimental.
```

> - [Signing, listing and verification with OCI image layout](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/how-to/oci-image-layout/) for signing images before they are pushed to a registry. It enables users sign and verify artifacts stored in the local file system.

Reviewer 5: We should clarify what "images" we have in mind. I would suggest changing it to "... signing OCI artifacts..." instead.

Also, the sentence: "It enables users sign and verify artifacts stored in the local file system." sounds grammatically incorrect. I would suggest changing to "It enables users to sign and verify artifacts stored in the local file system."

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Signing, listing, and verifying artifacts with OCI image layout](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/how-to/oci-image-layout/) before they are pushed to a registry. This enables users sign and verify artifacts stored on the local file system.
```

> - Support [signing, listing and verification with OCI image layout](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/how-to/oci-image-layout/) for signing images before they are pushed to a registry. It enables users sign and verify artifacts stored in the local file system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Signing, listing and verification with OCI image layout](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/how-to/oci-image-layout/) for signing images before they are pushed to a registry. It enables users sign and verify artifacts stored in the local file system.
```

Avoid using the word `support` in this context since experimental features are not supported.

> - [OCI distribution referrers API](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc2/spec.md#enabling-the-referrers-api), which allows Notation CLI to fetch a list of signatures in an efficient and clean manner.

Reviewer 5: I would suggest removing ", which" from the sentence to make it more readable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [OCI distribution referrers API](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc2/spec.md#enabling-the-referrers-api). This allows the Notation CLI to fetch a list of signatures in an efficient and clean manner.
```

> - Support [OCI distribution referrers API](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc2/spec.md#enabling-the-referrers-api), which allows Notation CLI to fetch a list of signatures in an efficient and clean manner.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [OCI distribution referrers API](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc2/spec.md#enabling-the-referrers-api), which allows Notation CLI to fetch a list of signatures in an efficient and clean manner.
```

### Extensibility: plugin support for Notation

> Notation has an [extensible design though a plugin framework](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) which provides plugin interfaces for users and vendors to implement their own integrations with the key/certificate management solutions or signing service. Notation has the following plugins available for use now.

Reviewer 6: nit:
I think it's a typo?
```suggestion
Notation has an [extensible design based on a plugin framework](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) which provides plugin interfaces for users and vendors to implement their own integrations with the key/certificate management solutions or signing service. Notation has the following plugins available for use now.
```

> Notation has an [extensible design based on a plugin framework](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) which provides plugin interfaces for users and vendors to implement their own integrations with the key/certificate management solutions or signing service. Notation has the following plugins available for use now.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Notation has an [extensible design based on a plugin framework](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md). This framework provides plugin interfaces for users and vendors to implement their own integrations with key/certificate management solutions or signing services. Currently, Notation has the following plugins available.
```

- [AWS Signer plugin for Notation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/signer/latest/developerguide/Welcome.html)
- [Azure Key Vault for Notation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/container-registry/container-registry-tutorial-sign-build-push)

### Integration with admission controller for Kubernetes usage

> To enable users to verify and secure image deployment on Kubernetes, the Notary Project maintainers worked with the [Ratify](https://github.com/deislabs/ratify) and [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) team respectively to provide solutions for verifying images signed by Notation before deploying them to Kubernetes. Users will have two different options to build a complete end-to-end image integrity workflow for their environments. See the following two guides for details.

Reviewer 5: I believe it should be "teams" (plural). I would also suggest simplifying the sentence as follows:
"The Notary Project maintainers worked with the [Ratify](https://github.com/deislabs/ratify) and [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) teams to offer solutions for verifying images signed by Notation before deploying them to Kubernetes." The "deploying to Kubernetes" is repeated twice in the original sentence.

Also, suggesting the following changes to the rest of the sentences:
"The following two guides describe the options to build an end-to-end image integrity workflow for Kubernetes environments."

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To enable users to verify and secure image deployment on Kubernetes, the Notary Project maintainers worked with the [Ratify](https://github.com/deislabs/ratify) and [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) teams to provide solutions for verifying images signed by Notation before deploying them to Kubernetes. Users have two different options to build a complete end-to-end image integrity workflow for their environments. For more details, see:
```

- [Sign and verify an image with Notation, Ratify, and OPA Gatekeeper](https://ratify.dev/blog/sign-and-verify-image-with-notation-ratify)
- [Verify CNCF Notary Project signatures with Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/docs/writing-policies/verify-images/notary/)

![e2e workflow](/e2e-workflow.png)

## Built-in security

> The Notary Project also completed fuzzing and security audit in 2023. All vulnerabilities found during the audits are fixed in Notation v1.0.0 (and also present in the prior v1.0.0 RC-7 release). You can find two security audit reports as follows.

Reviewer 5: I would suggest making this a bit more engaging:
"As part of our commitment to security, the Notary Project maintainers engaged with CNCF to set up continuous fuzzing of the sources code and completed a security audit in 2023. All vulnerabilities found during the testing and the audit were fixed before the release of the libraries and the CLI. Below are links to the security reports:"

> The Notary Project also completed fuzzing audit and security audit in 2023. All vulnerabilities found during the audit are fixed in Notation v1.0.0 (and also present in the prior v1.0.0 RC-7 release). You can find two security audit reports as follows.

Reviewer 2: > fuzzing audit and security audit

fuzzing and security audits

Reviewer 2: > during the audit are fixed

during the audits are fixed

- [Notation Security Audit Report 2023](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/security/reports/audit/ADA-notation-security-audit-23.pdf)
- [Notary Project fuzzing audit report 22-23](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/tree/main/security/reports/fuzzing/ADA-fuzzing-audit-22-23.pdf)

## What's the next

> The Notary Project maintainers are considering the following features for the future milestones. If you are interested in the plan or you have new ideas, feel free to let us know in the Slack channel or GitHub issues.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Notary Project maintainers are considering the following features for the future milestones. If you are interested in the plan or you have new ideas, feel free to let us know in the [Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T08PSQ7BQ/CQUH8U287/) or [GitHub issues](https://github.com/notaryproject/.github/issues).
```

> The Notary Project maintainers are considering the following features for the future milestones. If you are interested in the plan or you have new ideas, feel free to let us know in the [Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T08PSQ7BQ/CQUH8U287/) or [GitHub issues](https://github.com/notaryproject/.github/issues).

Reviewer 5: I believe "the" should be removed from  "the future milestones" as those are not determined yet.

I would also suggest changing to:
"...feel free to let us know in the project's [Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T08PSQ7BQ/CQUH8U287/) or by filing a [GitHub issue](https://github.com/notaryproject/.github/issues)."

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Notary Project maintainers are considering the following features for future milestones. Feel free to reach out on the [Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T08PSQ7BQ/CQUH8U287/) or [GitHub issues](https://github.com/notaryproject/.github/issues) to ask questions, provide feedback, or share ideas.
```

> - Sign and verify any file, even if distributed outside of an OCI registry

Reviewer 5: I would change "file" to "blob" and suggest changing the sentence as follows.
"Sign and verify arbitrary blobs"

- [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-action) and other CI/CD integration for signing and verification
- [HashiCorp Vault plugin](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-hashicorp-vault) (experimental)
- Plugin lifecycle management
- Timestamping support
- Manage trust policy via CLI commands

## Acknowledgements

The Notary Project release team wants to thank the entire Notary Project community for all the activity and engagement that has been vital for helping the project grow and reach this major milestone.

> ## Try it now

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this be before the Acknowledgements?

Reviewer 4: I think its fine here.

If you do move it, I'd suggest making it the first section before `## What is Notary Project and Notation?` . This approach immediately directs people to try it out.

> You can follow this [interactive tutorial](https://killercoda.com/notaryproject/scenario/notation) to try Notation CLI v1.0.0 in an online cloud playground or follow the [quick start](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/quickstart/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can follow this [interactive tutorial](https://killercoda.com/notaryproject/scenario/notation) to try Notation CLI v1.0.0 in an online cloud playground or follow the [quick start](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/quickstart/) on your developer computer.
```

To learn more about the overall Notary Project and terminologies, see [Notary Project Overview](https://github.com/notaryproject/.github#notary-project-overview) and [FAQ - Notary Project Terms](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/faq/#notary-project-terms).

## Highlights

There are some remarkable new features and updates in the first major release. This blog post walks through the major updates in this release.

### Specifications

[Notary Project specifications](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/releases/tag/v1.0.0) reach its first major release. All specifications, requirements, scenarios, threat model, and security audit reports are available in this release. To interoperate with Notary Project tooling or develop your own reference implementation, follow the latest Notary Project specifications for details.

> ### Strengthen signing and verification functionalities

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Signing and verification functionalities
```

From the software producer's perspective, signing a software artifact is the way to ensure authenticity and trust when distributing a software to consumers. Notary Project provides the follow core capabilities for the signing experience.

- Sign artifacts using signing keys stored securely in key management system (KMS) using vendor or customer specific plugins

> - Store signatures using [OCI Image Manifest](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc3/spec.md) for standardization and portability

Reviewer 3: Same comment here as we made on Shiwei's blog. Mention  [image-spec v1.0.2](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/tree/v1.0.2)
 as well

- Support two signature envelope formats - [JWS](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-jws.md) and [COSE](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/v1.0.0/specs/signature-envelope-cose.md) for interoperability

From the software consumer's perspective, verifying the signature of a signed artifact ensure the integrity and authenticity. Notary Project provides the following core capabilities for verification experience:

> - Verify signatures using [trust store and trust policy](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/trust-store-trust-policy.md) with fine-tuned configuration for repository specific, and multiple signature verification levels and multiple signature verification levels.  [notation policy](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/cli-reference/notation_policy/) command is also introduced in v1 release to simplify the policy management

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Verify signatures using [trust store and trust policy](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/trust-store-trust-policy.md) with fine-tuned configuration for repository specific,  and multiple signature verification levels.  [notation policy](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/cli-reference/notation_policy/) command is also introduced in v1 release to simplify attaching and inspecting the policy.
```

In addition, `--verbose` flag with all CLI commands, providing troubleshooting capability for developers and users respectively.

### Experimental features

Experimental features are intended for testing and evaluation purposes only and should not be used in production environments. Users can enable experimental features in Notation CLI by setting the environment variable `NOTATION_EXPERIMENTAL` to 1. 

There are two major features which are marked as experimental stage but might be useful in some specific scenarios.
 
- Support [signing, listing and verification with OCI image layout](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/how-to/oci-image-layout/) for signing images before they are pushed to a registry. It enables users to sign and verify images in an air-gapped environment.
- Support [OCI distribution referrers API](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc2/spec.md#enabling-the-referrers-api), which allows Notation CLI to fetch a list of referrers in an efficient and clean manner.

> ### New specifications

Reviewer 7: Suggest move specification to the first item and remove `New` avoid thinking of "Old".

> [Notary Project specifications](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/releases/tag/v1.0.0) reach its first major release. All specifications, requirements, scenarios, threat model, and security audit reports are available in this release. To interoperate with Notary Project tooling or develop your own client implementation, follow the latest Notary Project specifications for details.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
[Notary Project specifications](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/releases/tag/v1.0.0) reach its first major release. All specifications, requirements, scenarios, threat model, and security audit reports are available in this release. To interoperate with Notary Project tooling or develop your own reference implementation, follow the latest Notary Project specifications for details.
```

### Better extensibility and more plugins support

Notation has an [extensible plugin framework design](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) which provides plugin interfaces for users and vendors to implement their own integrations with the key/certificate management solutions or signing service. Notation has the following plugins available to use now.

- [AWS Signer plugin](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/signer/latest/developerguide/Welcome.html)
- [Azure Key Vault plugin](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/container-registry/container-registry-tutorial-sign-build-push)

> - [HashiCorp Vault plugin](https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-hashicorp-vault) (Alpha)

Reviewer 7: Suggest removing this plugin as not released, and considering recent license change.

Author: I changed the status of the HashiCorp Vault plugin to `Experimental`, which means it is still in development and for testing purposes. Considering this is an open-source popular KMS, I think we should at least provide visibility for users especially who want an on-prem KMS solution with Notation. 

For the license change, I think it doesn't impact the HashiCorp Vault plugin since this plugin only uses Vault's API. @justincormack  has a confirmation on https://github.com/cncf/foundation/issues/617#issuecomment-1675803976

Author: Another consideration is to move the HashiCorp Vault plugin to the "What's the Next" section. It will reduce concerns here.

Author: After a discussion with @yizha1 . I will follow the second option as mentioned above.

### Integration with admission controller for Kubernetes usage

As more and more users are requesting to verify and secure image deployment on Kubernetes, the Notary Project maintainers worked with the [Ratify](https://github.com/deislabs/ratify) and [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) team respectively to provide solutions for verifying images signed by Notation before deploying them to Kubernetes. Users will have two different options to build a complete end-to-end image integrity workflow for their environments. See the following two guides for details.

> - [Sign and verify an image with Notation, Ratify, and OPA Gatekeeper](https://ratify.dev/blog/sign-and-verify-image-with-notation-ratify)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Verify an image signature by using OPA Gatekeeper with Ratify](https://ratify.dev/blog/sign-and-verify-image-with-notation-ratify)
```

Author: We can't change the original title since that is an external link

- [Verify CNCF Notary Project signatures with Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/docs/writing-policies/verify-images/notary/)

![e2e workflow diagram](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/S1bow5HO2.png)

## Security audit

> The Notary project also completed fuzzing audit and security audit in 2023. All vulnerabilities found during the audit are fixed in Notation v1.0.0 (and also present in the prior v1.0.0 RC-7 release). You can find two security audit reports as follows.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Notary Project also completed fuzzing audit and security audit in 2023. All vulnerabilities found during the audit are fixed in Notation v1.0.0 (and also present in the prior v1.0.0 RC-7 release). You can find two security audit reports as follows.
```

- [Notation Security Audit Report 2023](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/security/reports/audit/ADA-notation-security-audit-23.pdf)
- [Notary Project fuzzing audit report 22-23](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/tree/main/security/reports/fuzzing/ADA-fuzzing-audit-22-23.pdf)

## What's the next

> The following new features are planned for the upcoming milestones. Feel free to let us know if you any ideas or requirements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following new features are planned for the upcoming milestones. Feel free to let us know of your ideas or use cases at [Notary Project Conversations on Slack](https://app.slack.com/client/T08PSQ7BQ/CQUH8U287/thread/CEX1W7WMD-1582660575.076600)
```

> - Sign and verify an arbitrary file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Sign and verify any file, even if distributed outside of an OCI registry
```

### Enhanced debug and troubleshooting experience

[notation inspect](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/cli-reference/notation_inspect/) command is available to get detailed information of signatures associated with the signed artifact in a human readable view.

In addition, `--verbose` flag with all CLI commands, providing troubleshooting capability for developers and users respectively.

### Experimental features

Experimental features are intended for testing and evaluation purposes only and should not be used in production environments. Users can enable experimental features in Notation CLI by setting the environment variable `NOTATION_EXPERIMENTAL` to 1. 

There are two major features which are marked as experimental stage but might be useful in some specific scenarios.
 
- Support [signing, listing and verification with OCI image layout](https://notaryproject.dev/docs/how-to/oci-image-layout/) for signing images before they are pushed to a registry. It enables users to sign and verify images in an air-gapped environment.

> - Support [OCI distribution referrers API](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/blob/v1.1.0-rc2/spec.md#enabling-the-referrers-api), which allows Notation CLI to fetch a list of referrers in an efficient and clean manner.

Reviewer 5: Same here - why is that important for Notation. We do not want to present Notation as tool for managing referrers. We should be explicit that this fetches the signatures in a more efficient way.

> ### Better extensibility and more plugins support

Reviewer 5: "Better and more" compared to what. I would suggest changing to "Plugin support for Notation" without the qualifiers.

> Notation has an [extensible plugin framework design](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) which provides plugin interfaces for users and vendors to implement their own integrations with the key/certificate management solutions or signing service. Notation has the following plugins available to use now.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Notation has an [extensible plugin framework design](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) which provides plugin interfaces for users and vendors to implement their own integrations with the key/certificate management solutions or signing service. Notation has the following plugins available for use now.
```

> Notation has an [extensible plugin framework design](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/v1.0.0/specs/plugin-extensibility.md) which provides plugin interfaces for users and vendors to implement their own integrations with the key/certificate management solutions or signing service. Notation has the following plugins available for use now.

Reviewer 5: "extensible plugin framework design" is a mouthful. We should try to use simpler language. Maybe change to "extensible design though a plugin framework"?

> - [AWS Signer plugin](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/signer/latest/developerguide/Welcome.html)

Reviewer 5: I would say "Amazon AWS Signer"

- [Azure Key Vault plugin](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/container-registry/container-registry-tutorial-sign-build-push)

### Integration with admission controller for Kubernetes usage

> To enable users to verify and secure image deployment on Kubernetes, the Notary Project maintainers worked with the [Ratify](https://github.com/deislabs/ratify) and [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) team respectively to provide solutions for verifying images signed by Notation before deploying them to Kubernetes. Users will have two different options to build a complete end-to-end image integrity workflow for their environments. See the following two guides for details.

Reviewer 5: Do we have agreement from those two OSS projects to add their names in the announcement?

Author: Yes

> As more and more users are requesting to verify and secure image deployment on Kubernetes, the Notary Project maintainers worked with the [Ratify](https://github.com/deislabs/ratify) and [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) team respectively to provide solutions for verifying images signed by Notation before deploying them to Kubernetes. Users will have two different options to build a complete end-to-end image integrity workflow for their environments. See the following two guides for details.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
To enable users to verify and secure image deployment on Kubernetes, the Notary Project maintainers worked with the [Ratify](https://github.com/deislabs/ratify) and [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/) team respectively to provide solutions for verifying images signed by Notation before deploying them to Kubernetes. Users will have two different options to build a complete end-to-end image integrity workflow for their environments. See the following two guides for details.
```

- [Sign and verify an image with Notation, Ratify, and OPA Gatekeeper](https://ratify.dev/blog/sign-and-verify-image-with-notation-ratify)
- [Verify CNCF Notary Project signatures with Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/docs/writing-policies/verify-images/notary/)

![e2e workflow](/e2e-workflow.png)

> ## Security audit

Reviewer 5: This heading is a bit dry. We should use something like: "Built-in security" or add more context to the heading

> ![e2e workflow diagram](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/S1bow5HO2.png)

Reviewer 7: The image address is wrong

The Notary Project also completed fuzzing audit and security audit in 2023. All vulnerabilities found during the audit are fixed in Notation v1.0.0 (and also present in the prior v1.0.0 RC-7 release). You can find two security audit reports as follows.

- [Notation Security Audit Report 2023](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/blob/main/security/reports/audit/ADA-notation-security-audit-23.pdf)
- [Notary Project fuzzing audit report 22-23](https://github.com/notaryproject/notaryproject/tree/main/security/reports/fuzzing/ADA-fuzzing-audit-22-23.pdf)

## What's the next

The following new features are planned for the upcoming milestones. Feel free to let us know of your ideas or use cases in the Slack channel or GitHub issues.

> - Sign and verify any file, even if distributed outside of an OCI registry

Reviewer 5: I am not sure listing the features is the best approach. Especially in bulleted form as this makes it to concrete and sets the expectations that they will come in next (???) release. I would suggest using a paragraph to explain what the future plans are and properly set the expectations.

Author: Revised the introduction paragraph
